WIP: Pairwise distance dask cuda blog post (#50)
dask/dask-blog: _posts/2019-08-09-pairwise-distance.md

---
layout: post
title: Optimizing distance functions in genomics space using Dask & Numba
author: Alistair Miles, John Kirkham, Matthew Rocklin
tags: [GPU, array, numba, genomics]
draft: true
theme: twitter
---
{% include JB/setup %}

In large scale genomics analysis, scientists try to reduce sequencing data from
multiple individuals into groups that share common traits. This requires
measuring how sequences differ from each other. A common way to do this is to
use a distance metric like [city block](

> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry ) or others. As this metric ends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry ). As this metric ends
```

up being computed pairwise over all of the samples, this can be a real

> bottleneck. Thus it is pairmount to have a performant distance computation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bottleneck. Therefore it is paramount to have a performant distance computation
```

> implementation to really leverage the hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementation that makes full use of the hardware available.
```

TODO Might be nice to have a picture or graph of what some data looks like

TODO explain what the data mean.

> So a representative dataset, might look something like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A representative dataset, might look something like this:
```

```python
# simulate some genetic data
x = np.random.choice(np.array([0, 1, 2], dtype='i1'),
                     p=[.7, .2, .1,],
                     size=(20_000, 1_000))
```

To start out, one might leverage a distance implementation from the highly

> optimized SciPy library. This is quick and can be dropped with relatively

Reviewer: ```suggestion
optimized SciPy library. This is quick and can be employed with relatively
```

> little effort as long as one's data fits what the function expects. So one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
little effort as long as one's data fits what the function expects. Consequently one
```

might end up with an implementation like this.

```python
import numpy as np
import scipy.spatial.distance as spd

def pairwise_cityblock_cpu(x):
    out = spd.pdist(x.T, metric='cityblock')
    out = out.reshape((1, out.shape[0]))
    return out
```

We can then try to run this on our representative dataset. This does reasonably
well and we haven't had to think to hard about the implementation. In some
cases, this may already be sufficient.

However we may find that while the performance is reasonable, we have a lot of
samples to process. We could speed things up a bit by running through small
batches of data in parallel. An easy way to get started on this work would be

> to make a Dask Array that handles operating on our data.

Reviewer: Link `Dask Array` to docs?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to make a [Dask Array]( https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/array.html ) that handles operations on our data.
```

> to make a Dask Array that handles operating on our data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to make a Dask Array that handles operations on our data.
```

Reviewer 2: Handled in latest commit.

  <line x1="0" y1="48" x2="34" y2="48" />
  <line x1="0" y1="60" x2="34" y2="60" />
  <line x1="0" y1="72" x2="34" y2="72" />
  <line x1="0" y1="84" x2="34" y2="84" />
  <line x1="0" y1="96" x2="34" y2="96" />
  <line x1="0" y1="108" x2="34" y2="108" />
  <line x1="0" y1="120" x2="34" y2="120" style="stroke-width:2" />

  <!-- Vertical lines -->
  <line x1="0" y1="0" x2="0" y2="120" style="stroke-width:2" />
  <line x1="34" y1="0" x2="34" y2="120" style="stroke-width:2" />

  <!-- Colored Rectangle -->
  <polygon points="0.000000,0.000000 34.501016,0.000000 34.501016,120.000000 0.000000,120.000000" style="fill:#ECB172A0;stroke-width:0"/>

  <!-- Text -->
  <text x="17.250508" y="140.000000" font-size="1.0rem" font-weight="100" text-anchor="middle" >1000</text>
  <text x="54.501016" y="60.000000" font-size="1.0rem" font-weight="100" text-anchor="middle" transform="rotate(-90,54.501016,60.000000)">20000</text>
</svg>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

With our Dask Array in hand, we can write a simple function to facilitate
applying our distance function on the data. By doing a little bit of work to
keep things general, we can easily swap in different distance functions based

> on the computation we need to do or leverage more performant implementations

Reviewer: There is a lot of `leverage` in this text, perhaps consider synonyms such as {engage, use, exercise, employ, exploit}?

that may exist for our data.

```python
def pairwise_cityblock_dask(x, f):
    
    # Compute number of blocks.
    n_blocks = len(x.chunks[0])

    # Compute number of pairs.
    n = x.shape[1]
    n_pairs = n * (n - 1) // 2
    
    # Compute distance in blocks.
    chunks = ((1,) * n_blocks, (n_pairs,))
    d = da.map_blocks(
        f, x, chunks=chunks, dtype=np.float64
    )

    # Sum blocks.
    out = da.sum(d, axis=0, dtype=np.float64)

    return out

```

Now we can write something like this.

```python
pairwise_cityblock_dask(x_dask, f=pairwise_cityblock_cpu).compute()
```

With this, we are able to get more of a speedup. We did a little bit of work,

> but not so much. Also we have managed to leverage the distance function from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but not a great amount. Also we have managed to leverage the distance function from
```

> but not so much. Also we have managed to leverage the distance function from

Reviewer: "leverage"

our serial case without issues.

> What if we still want more performance than even this offers? Well if we have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if we still want more performance than this offers? Well, if we have a
```

> GPU in our computer or a cluster of them, we could leverage that compute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GPU in our computer, or a cluster of them, we could leverage that compute
```

Reviewer: "leverage" perhaps "use"?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GPU in our computer or a cluster of them, we could use that compute
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GPU in our computer, or a cluster of them, we could use that compute
```

resource for our problem.

First we need to move our data to the GPU. There are several ways we could do

> this. Though one reasonably approachable way is to use Numba. We could write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this, though one reasonably approachable way is to use Numba. We could write
```

Reviewer: Add link to Numba?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this; though, one reasonable way is to use [Numba]( https://numba.pydata.org ). We could write
```

> the following to handle our in-memory case.

Reviewer: In memory with respect to what? In machine RAM vs in GPU RAM.

```python

> x_cuda = cuda.to_device(x)

Reviewer: Should explain what this does?

```

We can also handle the Dask case pretty easily by simply writing this.

```python
x_dask_cuda = da.map_blocks(cuda.to_device, x)
```

This may take a moment as data moves from the CPU to the GPU.

> At a first pass, we might write something Numba's CUDA JIT. Here we might need

Reviewer: I'm not sure this sentence makes sense? Also might be a good idea to add a one sentence on "what a JIT is".

to tune how many threads we use per block.

TODO Add this code

> Alternatively we could be a bit clever and write this code using `forall`. This is pretty handy as we now no longer need to think about CUDA threads per block. There is a caveat though; we need to collapse our `for`-loops into 1 loop. One can do this with a bit of ingenuity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively we could be a bit clever and write this code using `forall`. This is pretty handy as we now no longer need to think about CUDA threads per block. There is a caveat though; we need to collapse our `for`-loops into one loop. One can do this with a bit of ingenuity.
```
also this needs a line wrap.

```python
import math

@cuda.jit(device=True)

> def square_coords_cuda(pair_index, n):

Reviewer: Some LaTeX spelling out the maths and/or a wiki link to a canonical form of this alg would be beneficial.

    pair_index = np.float32(pair_index)
    n = np.float32(n)
    j = (((2 * n) - 1) - math.sqrt((1 - (2 * n)) ** 2 - (8 * pair_index))) // 2
    k = pair_index - (j * ((2 * n) - j - 1) / 2) + j + 1
    j = np.int64(j)
    k = np.int64(k)
    return j, k

@cuda.jit

> def kernel_cityblock_cuda(x, out):

Reviewer: I feel it would be useful to have a version of the CPU equivalent algorithm for comparison as it's not obvious the level of effort required to convert from CPU to CUDA as the current baseline CPU version is a SciPy function call (`scipy.spatial.distance.spd`)? A useful side effect of this would be a `nopython` mode JIT compiled variant which gives a hint at CPU/parallel CPU performance vs. CUDA.

A further side effect would be that it might be help in working out a strategy for conversion of such algs. `njit(cpu) -> guvectorize(cpu) -> guvectorize(cuda) -> cuda kernels -> optimising cuda kernels` (mixed in with dask?)?

    m = x.shape[0]
    n = x.shape[1]
    n_pairs = (n * (n - 1)) // 2
    pair_index = cuda.grid(1)
    if pair_index < n_pairs:
        # Unpack the pair index to column indices.
        j, k = square_coords_cuda(pair_index, n)
        # Iterate over rows, accumulating distance.
        d = np.float32(0)
        for i in range(m):
            u = np.float32(x[i, j])
            v = np.float32(x[i, k])
            d += math.fabs(u - v)
        # Store distance result.
        out[pair_index] = d

        
def pairwise_cityblock_cuda(x):

    # Set up output array.
    n = x.shape[1]
    n_pairs = (n * (n - 1)) // 2
    out = cuda.device_array(n_pairs, dtype=np.float32)

    # Let numba decide number of threads and blocks.
    kernel_spec = kernel_cityblock_cuda.forall(n_pairs)
    kernel_spec(x, out)

    # Reshape to allow for map blocks.
    out = out.reshape((1, out.shape[0]))
    
    return out
```

As with any JIT, we benefit by doing a warmup run first. Though that's easy
enough to do. Then we are ready to compute our result.

```python
dist_cuda = pairwise_cityblock_cuda(x_cuda)

> cuda.synchronize()

Reviewer: Might want to explain why this is needed, it's a common stumbling block in assessing the performance of CUDA functions (Numba core devs answer this question regularly)?

```

If work needs to be done on the CPU afterwards, we can copy it back like so.

```python
dist_cuda.copy_to_host()
```

## Larger dataset

If we have a few GPUs at our disposal either in a desktop or a cluster, we
could launch a Dask cluster on it.

```python
from dask_cuda import LocalCUDACluster
from dask.distributed import Client

cluster = LocalCUDACluster()
client = Client(cluster)
```

Then distribute our computation over that cluster.

```
dist_big_cuda = pairwise_cityblock_dask(x_big_dask_cuda, f=pairwise_cityblock_cuda).compute()

> ```

Reviewer: It'd probably be worth making this into a notebook so that it can be downloaded and executed, it'd also shake out any bugs in the code blocks in the document? Having some canned/expected output would definitely help with ensuring that algorithm translations etc are done correctly.

Reviewer 2: Yeah this started as a notebook originally. Then we moved it into this blogpost form so we could publish and share it a bit more broadly.
